# sedhyd-2019 ðŸ’§

Resources for the SEDHYD 2019 conference (24-28 June 2019).

## Links ðŸ”—

* [Community Surface Dynamics Modeling System
  (CSDMS)](http://csdms.colorado.edu)
* [Basic Model Interface (BMI)](http://bmi.readthedocs.io)
* [Python Modeling Toolkit (pymt)](http://pymt.readthedocs.io)
* [SEDHYD 2019](http://www.sedhyd.org/2019)

## Get Started ðŸš€

Install *pymt* using the *conda* package manager,

    $ conda env create --file=environment.yml

# Extended Abstract ðŸ“ƒ

**Exploring Surface Processes Using the Community Surface Dynamics
Modeling System Modeling Tools**

**Jordan Adams**, Postdoctoral Research Associate, The Institute of
Arctic and Alpine Research, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO,
jordan.adams\@colorado.edu **Irina Overeem**, Associate Professor,
Department of Geological Sciences, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO,
irina.overeem\@colorado.edu **Eric Hutton**, Chief Software Engineer,
Community Surface Dynamics Modeling System, University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO, eric.hutton\@colorado.edu **Gregory Tucker**, Professor,
Department of Geological Sciences, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO,
gtucker\@colorado.edu **Albert Kettner**, Research Scientist II, The
Institute of Arctic and Alpine Research, University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO, albert.kettner\@gmail.com

**Extended Abstract**

Hydrological and sediment transport processes operate over a range of
temporal and spatial scales. Flood events can cause catastrophic erosion
rates over short timescales, reshaping floodplains and catchments in
hours or over days. Over longer timeframes, from decades to millennia,
the cumulative effect of these erosional events sculpt watershed
morphologies, driving changes in drainage area, density and relief. The
feedbacks between hydrologic events and sediment transport can shape
areas as small as millimeter-scale hillslope rills or as large as
continental-scale river basins.

The unpredictable or unobservable nature of flood events makes it
difficult to study the interaction between hydrologic and
sedimentological proccesses. The stochastic nature of floods make it
challenging to predict when an event will occur and how to best measure
erosional and depositional changes. Morphological responses to climate
change occur on timescales too long to make meaningful observations.
Moreover, at many relevant natural hazard scales, hydrology and sediment
transport are entangled with ecosystem and human dynamics, complex
interactions that are even less understood.

Improved understanding, and ultimately, improved resiliency in the face
of hydrologically- driven Earth surface change, require computational
models that bridge boundaries and link process mechanics. Many
hydrological models exist and have a variety of uses: forecasting floods
or water resource availability (e.g. WRF-Hydro, Gochis et al., 2018);
channel and floodplain engineering (e.g. HEC-RAS, Brunner, 2016) or
groundwater resource assessment (SWAT, USDA ARS Grassland Soil and Water
Research Laboratory, 2018). As computational resources become more
efficient, more researchers are adding numerical modeling skills to
their repertoire. Yet, as more models are built, questions remain: can
the surface processes community work together to share these
ever-improving tools? Is there a way to standardize both existing and
new modeling components so that they can be coupled flexibly and
effectively?

The Community Surface Dynamics Modeling System (CSDMS) is a NSF-funded
initiative that supports the open software efforts of the surface
processes community. CSDMS sets modeling standards and protocols, hosts
a Model Repository to distribute models and modeling tools, and provides
cyberinfrastructure to an interdisciplinary set of community members.
The CSDMS Repository contains over 200 tools and models that simulate
lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere or cryosphere dynamics. The goal of
CSDMS is simple: to expedite scientific discovery and eliminate
duplication of effort by sharing computational resources.

As part of these efforts, CSDMS has designed a new tool for
hypothesis-driven modeling; the CSDMS Python Modeling Tool (PyMT)
provides a unified framework that allows users to interactively run and
couple numerical models written in a variety of programming languages.
These coupled models can operate on disparate time and space scales,
which are then resolved by PyMT. Principally, the PyMT is three things:
(1) a collection of Earth-surface models wrapped with a common
interface, (2) an extensible plug-in framework into which new models can
be incorporated, and (3) tools for coupling models that operate on a
variety of spatial grids and time steps.

Currently, the PyMT model collection consists of several dozen
Earth-surface models that cover a variety of process domains that range
from land, to coast, to ocean. Each of these models were contributed by
CSDMS community members to the CSDMS Model Repository as standalone
models. There was no initial intent for these models to be part of a
larger framework. The heterogeneity of the collection is represented not
just in the variety of programming languages but also by idiosyncratic
user interfaces (e.g. model specific input and output file formats).

All models within the PyMT collection are wrapped in a single, unified,
interface within the Python programming language. An overriding tenet of
the PyMT is: *if you know how to use one pymt model, you know how to use
all pymt models*. The PyMT model interface allows users to interactively
run models within a Python kernel such that they can advance models
through time while dynamically changing their state variables. This
allows users to become model composers by orchestrating different model
functionality within a script, while being able to leverage the power of
the Python programming language and its powerful collection of
third-party packages (e.g. numpy, scipy, matplotlib, xarray, dask).

The PyMT provides an extensible plugin framework that allows additional
models to be easily incorporated into the PyMT framework. This allows
new models, written by domain experts, to become PyMT models usable by a
broad community in potentially novel ways. To be incorporated into PyMT,
new models must be written to expose a Basic Model Interface (BMI). At
its core, the BMI is simply a specification that defines the necessary
functions a model must provide to make it coupleable. These functions
control how a model is initialized, updates through time, as well as how
a model provides its output variables or ingests externally provided
input variables. The CSDMS modeling stack additionally provides tools
for automatically wrapping models written in several programming
languages (currently C, C++, Fortran, and Python) into PyMT. These four
languages cover a significant majority of the models in the CSDMS Model
Repository.

The PyMT contains a collection of tools useful for model coupling
(either model-to-model or model-to-data coupling). As mentioned
previously, the CSDMS Model Repository is a heterogeneous collection of
models that were not necessarily written with the intent of coupling to
other models. As such, a significant obstacle when coupling models is
transferring values from one model's solution grid to another. Included
with the PyMT are a set of grid mappers, based on the Earth System
Modeling Framework (ESMF) grid mapping library. This allows for
efficient mapping of values between large grids. Other coupling tools
include:

*  Unit conversion utilities, which conform to the cfunits conventions,
   when models provide the same values but with different units,
*  Time interpolators that estimate state variables between model
   timesteps,
*  Output writers that write model output to standardized netCDF files
   that conform to the UGRID/SGRID specifications

PyMT is designed to expedite the process of exploring ideas, testing
hypotheses, and comparing models with data, and make Earth-surface
process models more accessible.

For proof of concept, we present an example of a coupled hydrodynamic
and bedrock incision model in PyMT. This work uses two components from
the Landlab model, OverlandFlow and DetachmentLtdErosion, as they are
implemented in PyMT (Adams et. al, 2017; Hobley et al., 2017). The
OverlandFlow component was originally developed to bridge the gap
between fully hydrodynamic models used to model single hydrograph events
and simplified 'steady-state' hydrology components used in long-term
fluvial geomorphology models. Figure 1 illustrates the difference
between these two model types: 'steady-state' models often simplify
rainfall and runoff into steady, constant values that drive steady,
constant incision rates (Figure 1a), while non-steady models can take
rainfall stochasticity into account and drive individual event
hydrographs and changing incision rates through time (Figure 1b). As
computational efficiency and speed have improved over the last decade,
more efforts have been made to bring hydrodynamics into models of
landscape evolution. The Landlab OverlandFlow model is an open-source
tool designed to achieve that goal.

![Figure 1][overland_flow.png]

**Figure 1**. Comparison of steady (**a**) and nonsteady (**b**)
hydrology models. The latter case illustrates how the OverlandFlow model
is implemented. A sample OverlandFlow workflow is also shown.

In this presentation, we run several test cases in PyMT to illustrate
landscape sensitivity to rainfall parameters, hydrograph shape and basin
orientation. These results are compared against traditional steady-state
model results. Landscapes eroded and evolved using nonsteady methods are
characterized by greater relief and increased channel concavities when
compared to steady results, suggesting that hydrodynamics should be
considered when studying the impact of bedrock river incision on
topographic evolution over long timescales.

The implementation of OverlandFlow and DetachmentLtdErosion is just one
example of coupled hydrology-sedimentology modeling available through
PyMT. This presentation will provide detailed background on how models
can be brought into the PyMT
framework, how PyMT resolves grid and temporal differences across
models, the existing hydrologic and sedimentologic tools in PyMT, and
examples of model output from the OverlandFlow and DetachmentLtdErosion
models.

**References**

*  Adams, J.M., Gasparini, N.M., Hobley, D.E., Tucker, G.E., Hutton, E.,
   Nudurupati, S.S. and Istanbulluoglu, E., 2017. The Landlab v1.0 OverlandFlow
   component: a Python tool for computing shallow-water flow across watersheds.
   Geoscientific Model Development, 10(4).
*  Brunner, G. W. (2016). HEC-RAS river analysis system 2D modeling user's
   manual. US Army Corps of Engineers---Hydrologic Engineering Center, 1-171.
*  Gochis, D.J., M. Barlage, A. Dugger, K. FitzGerald, L. Karsten, M.  McAllister,
   J. McCreight, J.  Mills, A. RafieeiNasab, L. Read, K. Sampson, D. Yates,
   W. Yu, 2018.  The WRF-Hydro modeling system technical description,
   (Version 5.0).  NCAR Technical Note. 107 pages. DOI:10.5065/D6J38RBJ
*  Hobley, D.E., Adams, J.M., Nudurupati, S.S., Hutton, E.W., Gasparini, N.M.,
   Istanbulluoglu, E.  and Tucker, G.E., 2017. Creative computing with Landlab:
   an open-source toolkit for building, coupling, and exploring two-dimensional
   numerical models of Earth-surface dynamics. Earth Surface Dynamics, 5(1), p.21.
*  USDA ARS Grassland Soil and Water Research Laboratory; Texas A&M AgriLife
   Research, 2018\. SWAT - Soil and Water Assessment Tool. USDA Agricultural
   Research Service; Texas A&M AgriLife Research.
   https://data.nal.usda.gov/dataset/swat-soil-and-water- assessment-tool
